README.md, before:

# Caterpillar

[**Daily Thoughts**](daily.md)

## About

The goal of the Caterpillar project is to create a **programming language** that
gives you a **immediate connection to the code** you're writing, enabling an
**intuitive understanding** of the program that you're working on.

The method for achieving this is **interactive programming**, the **direct
manipulation of a running program**, instead of going through an extended loop
of re-compiling, re-starting, and re-finding the right location in your program
where you can test the change you made.

Caterpillar is still early-stage and experimental. This goal has not nearly been
achieved yet. I'm incrementally approaching this long-term vision through a
series of practical prototypes with specific, short-term goals.

You can find the currently active prototype in the [`capi/` directory](capi/).
The [`archive/` directory](archive/) contains a number of previous prototypes at
various levels of completion.

## Design

I'm currently working on collecting the ideas that have been guiding me into a
rough design document: [design.md](design.md)

But please don't read too much into that. This project has already gone through
a large number of prototypes, and I'm sure it will go through more. My ideas
have changed significantly during that time, and they will keep evolving.

At some point, I hope to develop one of these prototypes into a productive
language. The only design that is really relevant is the one implemented in
that.

## Acknowledgements

I'd like to thank [Martin Dederer](https://github.com/martindederer) for
suggesting the name!

## License

This project is open source, licensed under the terms of the
[Zero Clause BSD License] (0BSD, for short). This basically means you can do
anything with it, without any restrictions, but you can't hold the authors
liable for problems.

See [LICENSE.md] for full details.

[Zero Clause BSD License]: https://opensource.org/licenses/0BSD
[LICENSE.md]: LICENSE.md

Commit message:

Update vision and status in README

README.md, after:

# Caterpillar

[**Daily Thoughts**](daily.md)

## Vision

**Caterpillar is a programming language** with a dual goal:

- Create an **immediate connection to the code you're writing**, to give you an
  intuitive understanding of what it's doing.
- Bring this experience to many places: browsers, servers, desktops, phones,
  watches, microcontrollers; CPUs and GPUs.

Caterpillar aims to achieve this via **interactive programming**; the practice
of directly manipulating your running program, instead of going through an
extended loop of re-compiling, re-starting, then navigating to where you can
test your change.

## Status

Caterpillar is still early-stage and experimental. It can hardly be called a
language right now. Development is focused on creating a basic solution for one
use case (game development) on one platform (browsers).

Caterpillar has gone through [a series of prototypes](archive/), of varying
levels of sophistication, each of which provided answers to different questions.
The [current prototype](capi/) explores whether an early focus on tooling is a
practical approach.

You can keep up with the project reading my
[daily thoughts](https://capi.hannobraun.com/daily), which include development
updates.

## Design

I'm currently working on collecting the ideas that have been guiding me into a
rough design document: [design.md](design.md)

But please don't read too much into that. This project has already gone through
a large number of prototypes, and I'm sure it will go through more. My ideas
have changed significantly during that time, and they will keep evolving.

At some point, I hope to develop one of these prototypes into a productive
language. The only design that is really relevant is the one implemented in
that.

## Acknowledgements

I'd like to thank [Martin Dederer](https://github.com/martindederer) for
suggesting the name!

## License

This project is open source, licensed under the terms of the
[Zero Clause BSD License] (0BSD, for short). This basically means you can do
anything with it, without any restrictions, but you can't hold the authors
liable for problems.

See [LICENSE.md] for full details.

[Zero Clause BSD License]: https://opensource.org/licenses/0BSD
[LICENSE.md]: LICENSE.md
