Let's revisit my earlier thought on the problems with
[ad-hoc effects in Rust](/daily/2024-12-12), and see how an
[algebraic effect system](/daily/2024-12-16) can solve those. Here's the initial
example again:

```rust
let name = names().find(|name| name.is_available());
```

Remember, when I changed `is_available` to be both asynchronous and fallible,
that turned into this monstrosity:

```rust
let name = stream::iter(names())
    .filter_map(|name| async move {
        name.is_available()
            .await
            .map(|is_available| is_available.then_some(name))
            .transpose()
    })
    .next()
    .await
    .transpose()?;
```

(Again, I'm not claiming that this is the best way to do it, and my point is not
how bad it is. My point is that it's not possible in Rust to write a `find`
function that can be used unchanged, with an asynchronous and/or fallible
function argument .)

Before we see how algebraic effects can improve on that, let's look at the
definition of `find`. A simplified version could look something like this:

```rust
fn find(&mut self, f: fn(&Self::Item) -> bool)
    -> Option<Self::Item>
```

It takes a function as an argument, uses it to search the iterator that `find`
is defined on, then returns a result, if any.

Let's re-imagine that using an algebraic effect system. Here I'm inventing a
`with` syntax that can be used to annotate any function, defining which effects
this function has:

```rust
fn find<effects X>(&mut self, f: fn(&Self::Item) -> bool with X)
    -> Option<Self::Item>
    with X
```

I've given `find` a type parameter called `X`, which represents any number of
(including zero) effects. The new signature states that the function parameter
`f` can have any effect, and that the `find` function has those same effects
(`with X` on both). So, if `f` is async, `find` is async. If `f` is fallible,
`find` is fallible. But `find` doesn't have to change to accommodate that.

Let's go one step further by leaning more into the effect system. That `find`
might or might not return a value, can also be an effect. Let's call that effect
`None`, because it would be triggered if there's no return value:

```rust
fn find<effects X>(&mut self, f: fn(&Self::Item) -> bool with X) -> Self::Item
    with None, X
```

Now we state that `find` has the `None` effect, in addition to any effects that
`X` brings in. I don't know if it would be a good idea to do it this way. I just
want to demonstrate what we _could_ do with an effect system.

But how does this `with` syntax help? Well, as a caller, we can now use this
single `find` function in every situation. Whether `is_available` is
asynchronous, fallible, or whatever else; it'll work. Here's how that could
look, if `f` itself had no effects, and we just have to handle the `None` effect
of `find`:

```rust
let name = try names().find(|name| name.is_available()) {
    None => {
        "Anonymous"
    }
};
```

I've invented this `try` syntax for handling effects, inspired by the existing
`match` syntax. If `find` doesn't find a name (it triggers the `None` effect),
then we fall back to the name "Anonymous".

How would that look, if `is_available` was both asynchronous and fallible? It
depends! Is our code in a position to handle these effects, or does it just want
to pass them on to its own callers?

```rust
let name = try names().find(|name| name.is_available()) {
    None => {
        "Anonymous"
    }
    Error(DatabaseError(err)) => {
        log!("Database error. Retrying...");
		    database.reconnect();
		    continue; // looks we are in some kind of loop
    }
    // not handling `Async`; some other code up the call stack will do that
};
```

This is a mixed scenario, where our code handles the database error, but not the
asynchrony (because it's asynchronous itself). And if our code had all of the
combined effects of the code it calls (`None`, `Error`, `Async`), then it
wouldn't have to do anything! It would look exactly like it did in the initial
example.

Would any of this be a good idea for Rust? Maybe; I don't know. I haven't put a
lot of thought into that, honestly, because this is not a proposal to improve
Rust. This is about demonstrating how algebraic effects can solve a real problem
in a real language. Rust is just an example, because it's the language I happen
to know best.
