Let's talk about [Rust] today, because it has
[ad-hoc effects](/daily/2024-12-11), no principled effect system, and has real
problems because of that. Here's a rather simple example that involves a
higher-order function:

```rust
let name = names().find(|name| name.is_available());
```

Okay, so `names` is a function that returns some kind of [`Iterator`]. We use
`find` and an anonymous function that we pass to it, to find the first name that
is available. All good!

But what if `is_available` can fail? Maybe it connects to a database? Well,
`find` expects its argument to return a `bool`, so the best we can do is panic
(another effect!) in there, which is not always desirable. Fortunately, there is
`try_find`:

```rust
let name = names().try_find(|name| name.is_available())?;
```

Now `is_available` can return a `Result`, which `try_find` passes on, for us to
handle. Again, all good! Except, maybe, that `try_find` is not available in
stable versions. And note how we needed a completely different method to deal
with this slightly different scenario.

But whatever, let's take a look at what would happen instead, if `is_available`
is `async`. It could call a database, remember? Now using [`Iterator`] is no
longer an option, because that is inherently synchronous. We need an
asynchronous iterator, which exists in the form of [`Stream`].

```rust
let name = stream::iter(names())
    .filter(|name| name.is_available())
    .next()
    .await;
```

Okay, so we convert our iterator into a stream. Then we find out that,
annoyingly, [`Stream`] (or [`StreamExt`], to be precise) does not have a `find`
method. But we can emulate that with `filter` and `next`. (Please note that I
left code that handles pinning out of this example and the next one. It would be
slightly more complicated and not relevant to the topic at hand.)

So we needed a completely new API to deal with `async`, but other than that, all
good? Not quite! If `is_available` talks to a database, then it's unrealistic
that it wouldn't be `async` _and_ fallible. How can we deal with that?

```rust
let name = stream::iter(names())
    .filter_map(|name| async move {
        name.is_available()
            .await
            .map(|is_available| is_available.then_some(name))
            .transpose()
    })
    .next()
    .await
    .transpose()?;
```

As you might have guessed, yes, we needed even more methods and do a whole song
and dance. Now, I'm not claiming that this is the best way to do it (it's just
the best I could come up with). But my point is this: The `filter` method from
my initial example is not able to abstract over its argument being fallible, or
async, or both. In Rust, it's impossible to write a function that does.

Starting tomorrow, let's speculate about how this could be much better, in a
language with effects as a first-class citizen!

[Rust]: https://www.rust-lang.org/
[`Iterator`]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/iter/trait.Iterator.html
[`Stream`]: https://docs.rs/futures/latest/futures/stream/trait.Stream.html
[`StreamExt`]: https://docs.rs/futures/latest/futures/stream/trait.StreamExt.html
