Dealing with a single linear value in the presence of an `Error` effect is, it
seems, [a solvable issue](/daily/2024-12-22). But what if you have multiple
linear values, only one of which is involved in possibly triggering a given
instance of the `Error` effect?

Let's look at another example:

```
file_a "a" write
file_b "b" write
```

Two files, and we're writing to each of them. But this can't work as written. If
writing to `file_a` triggers `Error`, then the `write` function (which triggers
the effect) can make sure that `file_a` is put into the error, and whoever ends
up handling the effect can dispose of the file accordingly. But that instance of
`write` doesn't know about `file_b`, so what happens to that?

The compiler must reject this code, but it could be made to work like this:

```
try
	file_a "a" write
handle Error(file_a)
	Error(file_a, file_b) trigger
end

try
	file_b "b" write
handle Error(file_b)
	Error(file_a, file_b) trigger
end
```

(This is just some example effect handling syntax I invented right now. If
anything like this makes its way into the language, it would most likely go
through more revisions.)

Here, we handle the `Error` effect for each call to `write`, and pass it on, but
with the second file value added. This solves the immediate problem, but is way
too verbose.

Maybe we could invent some clever API that does this for us. Or maybe there
could be some kind of implicit rule, that every effect gets automatically
transformed by every scope it goes through, with all the linear values being
added to it. Then the initial example would just work. But that sounds quite
complicated, and too magical to easily understand.
