Having [region-based memory management](/daily/2024-10-16), and providing
different kinds of regions with different memory management strategies, would
require having different types of handles for referring into these regions. This
implies that [we're going to need higher-kinded types](/daily/2024-10-17) to
deal with those types.

At least that's what I thought. My original plan for today was to explain
higher-kinded types and why they're needed. But all I've managed to do is to
confuse myself instead.

I started with this motivating example in Rust:

```rust
struct Person<H: Handle> {
    name: String,
    parents: [H; 2],
}
```

A person that refers to its parents using some kind of handle. It doesn't care
where its parents are stored, meaning it also doesn't care what kind of handle
it's using. So it accepts a type parameter `H` to represent the handle. It only
expects that `H` conforms to a `Handle` trait (not shown here), that provides
some way to access the data it refers to.

But this isn't type-safe. The parents would also be `Person`s, but we don't
encode that requirement anywhere. My plan was to use this as a starting point
and show how this could be solved with higher-kinded types.

Except, I can write this:

```rust
struct Person<H: Handle<Person<H>>> {
    name: String,
    parents: [H; 2],
}

trait Handle<T> {
    fn get(&self) -> &T;
}
```

Which is just regular Rust. And by all accounts, Rust doesn't have higher-kinded
types.

And now I'm confused about what this is, and why it's not a higher-kinded type,
and what exactly higher-kinded types actually are, and whether I have any
business working on a programming language. (Probably a firm "no" on that last
one, but who cares.)

I'm taking this as a sign to take a step back and think about something else for
a bit. By the time I get to this part of the language (which likely is a long
way off), I might have a better understanding. And even if not, it's important
to remember that the goal isn't to implement higher-kinded types. The goal is to
make memory management work in the way I need it to.
